# README.md

## Background
This is a submission for data cleaning project for
the Coursera class [Getting and Cleaning Data](https://www.coursera.org/learn/data-cleaning).

It uses data sets from Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset. Detailed description of the source data can be viewed [here](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones).

Original data set is obtained through the following link:
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

A duplicate of the source data with detailed description can also be found in this repo.  See [data/README.txt](https://github.com/ysquare/GettingCleaningData/blob/master/data/README.txt) for more information.

## Files included
- **README.txt**: This file.
- **run_analysis.R**: The main executable R script in this project.
- **tidy_output.txt**: the dataset generated by run_analysis.R, which is a tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.
- **Codebook.md**: a description of all the fields in the dataset tidy_output.
- **Data**: folder containing all the original data and description from the source.

## Script task

The script run_analysis.R finishes the following tasks according the project requirements.

1. It loads the test data (X_test, y_test, subject_test) and train data (X_train, y_train, subject_train) and merges them separately into two data frames;
1. It combines the test data frame and train data frame into a single one
1. It then keeps the data columns with "mean()" or "std()" in the column names, and removes all the rest;
1. It replaces the activity index (ranged from 1 to 6) with corresponding labels (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING);
1. It then improves the readability of the column names by removing meaningless symbols and capitalizing words
1. Finally it grouped the data by activity and subject, summarize the variables with mean function, and write the data to an output file.


## Further information
The following text is extracted from the original data package.  Read on to learn details regarding the meaning of each variables and how they were collected.
### Experiments
The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features_info.txt' for more details.

### Data Instruction
For each activity and each person, there's a record provided for the average and stand deviation of:

- Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
- Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope.
- A 66-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables.
- Its activity label.
- An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.



### License:
See [Data](https://github.com/ysquare/GettingCleaningData/tree/master/data) folder for all information about the source.

>Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication [1]

>[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

>This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited.

>Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.
